---
title: Big Bang
period: - 138200000000
period_details: About 13.82 billion years ago
category: Physics
source: Origin Story. A Big History of Everything - David Christian
---
The forms that come and go—and of which your body is but one—are the flashes of my dancing limbs. Know Me in all, and of what shall you be afraid?
—Imagined Words of the Hindu God Shiva, from Joseph Campbell, The Hero with a Thousand Faces

All the evidence we have at present tells us that this strange, tiny, and fantastically hot object really existed about 13.82 billion years ago.

Stephen Hawking argues that the question of beginnings is just badly put. If the geometry of space-time is spherical, like the surface of Earth but in more dimensions, then asking what existed before the universe is like looking for a starting point on the surface of a tennis ball. That’s not how it works. There is no edge or beginning to time, just as there is no edge to the surface of Earth.

Today, some cosmologists are attracted to another set of concepts that tug us back to the idea of a universe without a beginning or end. Perhaps our universe is part of an infinite multiverse in which new universes keep popping out of big bangs. This could be right, but at present we have no hard evidence for anything before our own, local big bang.

The universe is to get less complex and more disorderly. Eventually, that tendency toward increasing disorder (what scientists term **entropy**) will win out, and the universe will turn into a sort of random mess without pattern or structure. 

As the Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger wrote: “We now recognize this fundamental law of physics to be just the natural tendency of things to approach the chaotic state (the same tendency that the books of a library or the piles of papers and manuscripts on a writing desk display) unless we obviate it.”

So how did the very first structures emerge? This is a problem for which science does not yet have complete answers, though there are many promising ideas.

We don’t know why the rules emerged or why they took the forms they did. We don’t even know if these rules were inevitable. Perhaps other universes exist with slightly different rules. Perhaps in some universes, gravity is stronger or electromagnetism is weaker.

There were structures and patterns as soon as energy emerged in distinct forms. When energy congealed into the first particles of matter, these, too, had rules. Neutrons, protons, and electrons, the basic constituents of atoms, appeared within seconds of the big bang, as did proton and electron antiparticles (that is, negatively charged protons and positively charged electrons), forming what physicists call matter and antimatter. As the universe plunged below the temperatures at which matter and antimatter could easily be created, there took place a violent, universe-wide demolition derby in which matter and antimatter annihilated each other, unlocking huge amounts of energy. Luckily for us, a tiny surplus of matter (perhaps one particle in a billion) survived the carnage. The leftover particles of matter got locked into place because temperatures were soon too low to turn them back into pure energy. And that leftover stuff is what our universe is made of.

As temperatures fell, matter diversified. Electrons and neutrinos were ruled by electromagnetism and the weak nuclear force. The protons and neutrons that form atomic nuclei were made from triplets of strange particles known as quarks, bound together by the strong nuclear force. Electrons, neutrons, quarks, protons, neutrinos … within just a few seconds of the big bang, our rapidly cooling universe had locked in some distinct structures, each with its own emergent properties. But as the hurricane of the big bang abated, the extreme energies needed to unlock these primordial structures vanished, and that’s why, to us, the different forms of energy and particles such as protons and electrons seem more or less immortal.

This is how chance and necessity combined to produce the first simple structures. The laws of physics had filtered out many possibilities—that was the necessity part. Chance then rearranged things randomly from the possibilities that remained. This is how it all works. As nanophysicist Peter Hoffmann writes: “Tempered by physical law, which adds a dash of necessity, chance becomes the creative force, the mover and shaker of our universe. All the beauty we see around us, from galaxies to sunflowers, is the result of this creative collaboration between chaos and necessity.”

Within a few minutes of the big bang, as protons and neutrons teamed up, more structures appeared. A single proton is the nucleus of a hydrogen atom; a pair of protons (with two neutrons) form the nucleus of a helium atom, so the universe was beginning to build the first atoms. But it takes a lot of energy to fuse protons because their positive charges repel each other, and temperatures were falling fast just after the big bang, so it was impossible to fuse more protons to form the nuclei of larger atoms. This explains a fundamental aspect of our universe: almost three-quarters of all the atoms in it are hydrogen, and most of the rest are helium.

A lot more matter consists of dark matter, stuff we don’t yet understand, though we know it exists because its gravitational pull determines the structure and distribution of galaxies. So, a few minutes after the big bang, our universe consisted of vast clouds of dark matter in which were embedded crackling plasmas of protons and electrons with photons of light flowing through them. Today, we find plasmas only in the centers of stars.

Now we must pause and wait about 380,000 years (almost twice as long as our species has existed on Earth). During this time, the universe kept cooling. When temperatures fell below ten thousand degrees Celsius, there was one more phase change, like steam turning into water. To explain this phase change, we need to understand that heat is really a measure of the motion of atoms. All particles of matter are constantly jiggling about with energy, like nervous children, and temperature is a measure of the average degree of jiggling. The jiggling is real. In a famous paper published in 1905, Einstein showed that the jiggling of atoms causes the random gyrations of dust particles in the air. As temperatures drop, particles jiggle less, until eventually they can link up. As the universe cooled, the electromagnetic force tugged negatively charged electrons toward positively charged protons until the electrons calmed down enough to fall into orbits around protons. And voilà! We had the first atoms, the basic constituents of all the matter around us.

Normally, isolated atoms are electrically neutral, because the positive and negative charges of their protons and electrons cancel each other out. So when the first atoms of hydrogen and helium formed, most of the matter in the universe suddenly went neutral, and the tingling plasma evaporated. Photons, the carriers of the electromagnetic force, could now flow freely through an electrically neutral mist of atoms and dark matter. Today, astronomers can detect the results of this phase change, because photons that escaped the plasma generated a thin background hum of energy (the cosmic microwave background radiation) that still pervades the entire universe.

Our origin story has crossed its first threshold. We have a universe. Already it has some structures with distinctive emergent properties. It has distinct forms of energy and matter, each with its own personality. It has atoms. And it has its own operating rules.

At the earliest moment for which we have some evidence, a split second after the big bang, the universe consisted of pure, random, undifferentiated, shapeless energy. We can think of energy as the potential for something to happen, the capacity to do things or change things. The energies inside the primeval atom were staggering, many trillions of degrees above absolute zero. There was a brief period of super-rapid expansion known as inflation. Expansion was so fast that much of the universe may have been projected far beyond anything we will ever see. That means that what we see today is probably just a tiny part of our entire universe.

A split second later, rates of expansion slowed. The turbulent energies of the big bang settled down, and as the universe kept expanding, the energies were spread out and diluted. Average temperatures fell, and they have kept falling, so today, most of the universe is just **2.76 degrees Celsius above absolute zero**. (Absolute zero is the temperature at which nothing even jiggles.) We don’t feel the chill, nor do any of the other organisms on planet Earth, because we are warmed by the campfire of our sun.

Within a billionth of a billionth of a billionth of a billionth of a second after the big bang, energy itself underwent a phase change. It split into four very different species. Today, we know them as **gravity, the electromagnetic force, and the strong and weak nuclear forces**. We need to get acquainted with their different personalities, because they shaped our universe. Gravity is weak, but it reaches across vast distances and always pulls things together, so its power accumulates. It tends to make the universe more clumpy.

There may be other species of energy. In the 1990s, new measures of the universe’s rate of expansion showed that the rate is increasing. Borrowing an idea first floated by Einstein, many physicists and astronomers now argue that there may be a form of **antigravity** that is present in all of space, so its power increases as the universe expands. Today, the mass of this energy may account for as much as 70 percent of the total mass of the universe. But even if it is beginning to dominate our universe, we don’t yet understand what this energy is or how it works, so physicists call it dark energy. The term is a placeholder. Watch this space, because understanding dark energy is one of the great challenges of contemporary science.

Matter appeared within the first second after the big bang. **Matter is the stuff that energy pushes around**. Until just over a century ago, scientists and philosophers assumed that matter and energy were distinct. We now know that matter is really a highly compressed form of energy. The young Albert Einstein demonstrated this in a famous paper in 1905. That formula—energy (E) is equal to mass (m) times the speed of light (c) squared, or E = **mc2**—tells us how much energy is compressed inside a given amount of matter. To figure out how much energy is locked up in a bit of matter, multiply the mass of the matter not by the speed of light (which is more than one billion kilometers per hour) but by the speed of light times itself. This is a colossal number, so if you uncompress a tiny bit of matter, you get a huge amount of energy. That’s what happens when an H-bomb explodes. In the early universe, the opposite process occurred. Huge amounts of energy were compressed into tiny amounts of matter, like motes of dust in a vast fog of energy. Remarkably, we humans have managed to re-create such energies briefly, in the Large Hadron Collider outside Geneva. And, yes, particles do start popping out of that boiling ocean of energy.

And we’re still in the first second …

